# Ryan Abernathey: Research Statement #

The overall goal of my research is to understand the factors which govern the
large-scale ocean circulation, and resulting transport of heat and tracers, on
timescales relevant for Earth's climate. The ocean components of global climate
models are still relatively coarse and crude compared to their atmospheric
counterparts, limiting our ability to make long term forecasts or study past
climates. My driving principle is that the best way to improve this situation is
through careful, focused studies of unresolved and / or poorly understood ocean
processes.

My central focus so far has been the process of _mesoscale dynamics and
transport_. The ocean mesoscale (roughly 10-300 km), characterized by a tangle of
eddies, jets, fronts, and filaments, is the most energetic scale of ocean
variability across the entire spectrum. Mesoscale eddies represent a powerful
mechanism for transporting ocean tracers, yet they are not explicitly resolved by
most climate models. Building on my Ph.D. work _[Abernathey et al., 2010;
Abernathey and Marshall, 2013]_, I have established myself as an
emerging leader in the field of ocean mesoscale dynamics. In particular, since
arriving at Columbia, I have applied novel methods to the analysis of satellite
observations to quantify how and why mesoscale mixing varies spatially across
the global ocean _[Klocker and Abernathey, 2014; Abernathey and Wortham, 2015]_.
I am currently leading an international collaboration to synthesize the past
decade of research on this problem in the form of a review paper.

A related but distinct problem is quantifying how mesoscale properties such as
kinetic energy, eddy size, and mixing rates depend parametrically on external
forcing (such as winds) and large-scale oceanographic properties (such as
stratification). I began to explore this issue in my Ph.D. _[Abernathey et al.,
2011]_ and postdoc _[Abernathey and Cessi, 2014]_. We have recently shown that
wind-driven changes in isopycnal mixing can overwhelm circulation changes in the
Southern Ocean _[Abernathey and Ferreira, 2015]_. My recently funded NSF CAREER
proposal, entitled _Evolution of Ocean Mesoscale Turbulence in a Changing
Climate_, builds on these ideas by proposing a comprehensive framework through
which to analyze changes in eddy properties over time. A paper on the
time-dependent ocean mesoscale response to wind changes was recently submitted
_[Sinha and Abernathey, 2016]_, my first with a student. In future work, we will
analyze changes in mesoscale properties over the historical satellite period
and, through high resolution global model simulations, into the anthropogenic
future. This work will comprise the major part of my research effort over the
next few years.

In addition to mesoscale dynamics, I maintain a strong regional interest in the
Southern Ocean, which has emerged in recent decades as the central node of the
global ocean overturning system. An ongoing, NSF-funded collaboration with
colleagues at Scripps Institution of Oceanography (and affiliated with the
large [SOCCOM Project](http://soccom.princeton.edu/)) involves the study of the
thermodynamic processes involved in the upwelling of deep water in the Southern
Ocean. This project was slow to spin up due to its technical complexity.
However, we have recently uncovered some exciting new results regarding the
importance of Antarctic sea ice in maintaining the Southern Ocean overturning
circulation _[Abernathey et al., 2016]_.

Since arriving at Columbia, I have pursued a number of other collaborations
with scholars at other institutions. I have worked closely with Anand
Gnanadesikan at Johns Hopkins to understand the consequences of spatially
variable mesoscale mixing for climate simulations. In a series of recent papers,
we have examined how mesoscale mixing rates impact ocean circulation and
stratification, anthropogenic CO2 uptake, geochemical tracer distributions, the
ocean biogeochemical pump, and ENSO variability. This collaboration has been a
valuable way for me to broaden my research portfolio and engage with a range of
topics within Earth system science. I have also worked closely with colleagues
at NCAR in the analysis of a new generation of high-resolution, eddy-resolving
global climate simulations. In particular, I contributed theoretical and
diagnostic frameworks which have helped explain the behavior of ocean
overturning circulation in these simulations.
